are you saying that you recommend that a
woman looking for a partner gets off the
birth control pill until they find one
yeah I mean researchers found when women
who were partnered to attractive men
went off hormonal birth control they
were more attracted to their partner but
for women who were partnered with less
attractive Partners they became less
attracted to their partners and reported
being less sexually
satisfied it's quite frightening Dr
Sarah Hill is a leading research
psychologist and Professor uncovering
the shocking effects the contraceptive
pill has had on women relationships and
society and what we can do about it
there's been nothing more instrumental
to women's ability to be able to achieve
independence than the birth control pill
and so we're very Cavalier and just
giving it to people oh well you should
go on it for this and you should go on
it for that but it has huge costs and
when I started to dig into the research
I found there's at least five different
things the birth control pill does to
change who we are and these risk factors
they're swept under the rug by their
doctors who are prescribing it first it
changes our emotional states with
increased risk for developing anxiety
and depression and then it influences
our ability to put on muscle mass and it
can also affect our sexual function
because it turns off that estrogen surge
that makes us feel sexier and makes us
want to have sex and there's more but we
also know that it affects men in two
different ways and this has implications
for society around us I'll tell you why
so so what are the alternatives for
women let's dive down into that first
this has always blown my mind a little
bit 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show so could I ask you for a favor
before we start if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this show is better for
you every single week we'll listen to
your feedback we'll find the guest that
you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do thank you so
much
Dr Sarah
Hill what is the mission that you're on
if you had to sort of encapsulate it
into a couple of sentences all of the
work you're doing into a couple of
sentences and the impact it has on
people like me but also my partners my
mother my sisters um who read and
understand your work what is that
mission um is to help women understand
themselves and I think that you know
part of that is doing the science that
helps to uncover the insights that help
women understand themselves and then
also being able to communicate that to
women um I think that you know for a
very long time because of the way that
medicine has been set up um the the
focus has been primarily on men um and
most of the things that we think that we
know about health and functioning in the
human body and brain is based on
Research conducted in men and so it's
taking that back and helping women
actually understand themselves as
themselves so would you say that this
conversation is is just for women no
absolutely not no this is a conversation
for women for women's partners and those
who love women right and so I think that
it's a conversation for everyone I have
these conversations because I'm
interested in the subject matter and as
I read through your work at the top of
your work I saw that you know you really
have a focus towards Women's Health and
women's issues but I can't explain how
unbelievably fascinating and
enlightening it was for me as someone
who is a boyfriend and a partner to a
woman um but also when when we talk
about the evolutionary psychology that
sort of is intertwined throughout your
work I was able to understand so much
about me as a man and the way I I am and
the way that I develop and my
testosterone and all those kinds of
things and also attraction and mating
preferences and all these things from
looking through your
work why why are you so focused on this
subject matter what is it what's the
sort of in your heart I mean for me it's
really fascinating to consider the way
that hormones influence who we are and
then to T think about something like the
birth control pill which almost all
women are on at some point in their life
and understanding that this actually by
changing women's hormones has the impact
of kind of fundamentally changing some
really important things about themselves
I mean this is really huge and this has
consequences for everything ranging from
who women are attracted to and might be
choosing as partners to women's mental
health right and it could end up having
consequences on the shape of the world
around us like we already know know that
birth control has had an impact on
women's ability to do things like go to
school and get Advanced degrees and we
see this played out when we look at
College classrooms that are becoming
inre increasingly female and one of the
big reasons for this is the birth
control pill it's like by allowing women
to know with almost perfect certainty
that they're not going to get pregnant
this has allowed women to make plans
which means that they can dream bigger
and achieve more than most of us would
have ever dreamed possible like 50 or
100 years ago right and so the pill
changes everything right by changing
women we change the world this has
implications for women this has
implications for their partners and this
has implications for society around us
we're seeing some of the downstream
positive impacts of this and then
there's also some other sort of
Downstream consequences which I think
society's now trying to understand and
contend with and I think one of them you
mentioned there is that more women in in
classrooms I think more women are
college educated now in the US or
becoming college educated and they're
running more and more and more um and
it's interesting because there's a study
which you site in your work I think it
was in your book where I read it that
shows women still have a preference for
men who have more resources and I was
wondering isn't this doesn't this create
a little bit of a a fundamental issue
because if more and more women have more
and more resources in many cases much
more than men but they have a preference
for men that have more resources isn't
there isn't there an issue here yeah no
there's actually there is an issue there
and in fact there have been people
including my former uh Mentor David bus
who who have talked about this idea that
there's a mating crisis going on and
that women who are becoming increasingly
college educated and you know getting
access to resources of their own that
they do continue to exhibit an increased
preference for partners with resources
women are what we call hypergamous right
which means that we like to mate up in
terms of achieve
and educational attainment and when you
have a populace like we do in the US of
women who are now on average more
educated than men it makes it more
difficult to find a a suitable partner
if you're a woman with an advanced
degree and you want somebody who has at
least as much education for you that's
going to lead to a more narrow pool of
mates and in fact what we see is that
there are an increasingly like large
number of women who are just choosing
not to get married and are choosing to
stay single and in fact there's a
wonderful um book called all the single
ladies that is about this very
phenomenon and um women are increasingly
choosing to opt out of long-term mating
if they're not able to find the
relationship that they want so two
questions there on the first point is
how do we know that women are dating
upwards and to the right right we know
that women are dating upwards because
that's what women Express a preference
for and it's also who women tend to
marry so when you look at um for example
uh you know data looking at um the
education levels of people who get
married and the age of of people when
they get married women generally will
marry somebody who's older and generally
earns more money than they do themselves
um and you know this is something that
isn't specific to the US this is
something that we tend to find um
cross-culturally that women tend to
express a preference for this and yes it
has become more common for women to be
open to partnering with people who earn
less money than themselves for example
or have less education in themselves
than what it used to be um but it's
still not what it would be if women were
actually more willing to make that
tradeoff what we see is that instead of
choosing to marry down what many women
are choosing to do is simply not get
married at all are they making that
choice or is it just a lack of good
options I think yes and yes right I
think that they're making that choice
because there isn't there aren't good
options so I think that many women feel
um the the constraint of the fact that
there's not as many partners available
as you know that have the qualities that
they're looking for and a long-term
partner and as a result of that they're
just making the choice when it's between
that like you know just staying single
and not partnering with somebody that
they desire or partnering with somebody
who has fewer resources than they do or
less education than they do themselves
they're choosing the former they're
instead choosing to be single instead of
um having to partner with somebody who
doesn't you know sort of meet what their
exacting standards are are are they
still having sex yeah you know that's a
good so sex is down like like sex is
trending downward um what we tend to see
is that people are having a lot less sex
than they used to they're having sex
later um they're having less they fewer
uh people are not virgins and that's a
double negative more people are virgins
when they're graduating high school and
college than there were in the past this
is becoming increasingly common it's
also really interesting when you
consider that in face of the fact that
we have something like hormonal birth
control where we have birth control
where you have you know an opportunity
for men and women to be able to have sex
without the having to have the fear of
pregnancy and yet people are having less
sex and that's a very complicated issue
that requires a lot of untangling to get
to the bottom of but one of those
factors is the fact that it's harder for
um you know imagine that you're a
college aged woman and you were looking
for somebody who at least is you know on
par with you in terms of their
educational attainment um most college
campuses are like 60% female and just
simply playing the odds I mean women are
going to have a harder time finding
somebody within their pool that they can
get together with and this is going to
mean less less dating for some of these
women and and less sex if women have
more money and more Independence as a
result of that money and success and
education why don't they just date down
as in why don't they date men that are
broke right yeah well you know we have
inherited this mating Psychology from
our distant ancestors who are very much
more reliant on men for things like
provisioning resource access and even
protection than what contemporary women
need and this is because throughout most
of our evolutionary history um we spent
our lives you know having to be pregnant
regularly lactating caring for young
children um and we're very heavily
dependent on the ability um of our
partner to gain access to things like
food and the other resources that we're
not able to get access to when we are
you know very pregnant or dealing with
young children like I don't know if
you've ever gone hunting before or met a
2-year-old but like the two things don't
mix right the children are loud they're
not going to allow you to sneak up on a
buffalo um it's not an ideal situation
for women so women historically have
been very dependent on men for resources
and we've inherited that that brain
because over the course of evolutionary
history women who would have placed an
emphasis on you know choosing Partners
who have these kinds of qualities they
would have been more likely to have
surviving Offspring who then passed that
tendency or that preference onto their
offspring who'd pass that preference
down to their offspring and so human you
know contemporary human women even
though we're able to gain access to
resources of our own we still have that
preference right we've inherited that
preference from our successful ancestors
because women who had that preference
would have performed better than women
who didn't pay attention to that sort of
thing so oftentimes people think things
are the way they are because of a
patriarchy or because of sort of social
factors yeah but you're saying that
there are sort of innate biological
differences and evolutionary differences
in men and women that go beyond our sort
of sexual organs and stuff oh yeah no
absolutely yeah you know in fact the
patriarchy which just refers to you know
male control of
resources wouldn't really exist if women
didn't desire resources and their
Partners um because the reason that men
tend to control a lot of resources is
because women demand resource access on
the part of their partners and if women
didn't care then men wouldn't work so
hard to get access to them you know
there's this really great quote by
Aristotle Onasis where he once said
without women all the power and money in
the world would be completely
meaningless and I think that there's a
lot of wisdom in that men work so hard
to control the resources not because men
together are banding you know together
and trying to hoard the resources and
keep them from women I don't think that
that's really how the world works and I
think if you have a look around we'd see
that that's not really how the world
Works instead it's an epiphenomenon of
the fact that men are competing amongst
you know amongst whoever else has access
to resources to get resources of Their
Own right and because women value this
in their choice of Partners oftentimes
men will go to Greater lengths to get
them right one of the reasons not the
only reason but certainly one of the
reasons that we see that more men tend
to be in um you know positions of being
a CEO for example is because oftentimes
men are more willing to make the
tradeoffs that you have to make to get
into those positions because men are
wired that way right and the reason that
they're wired that way is because
they've inherited these Tendencies to
want this despite the costs
because it would have paid off in terms
of being able to attract better Partners
a greater number of Partners right and
then being able to have your children do
better right and so you know the
patriarchy yes that is something that
exists right we do tend to see that men
tend to control resources more
frequently than women in most societies
around the world um but this isn't
because men are banding together and
trying to keep exclude women instead
this is just a product of men's evolved
psychology um trying to work as hard as
they can to get access to resources in
part because women require them and men
are much more likely to take risks
aren't they as you say so I was as you
were speaking I was thinking about the
the gambling statistics that I read that
said the vast majority of gambling
addicts are are men so so I was just
thinking about that in the context of
like entrepreneurship and these kinds of
things is that to say that men are going
to be more
entrepreneurial yeah yeah you know I
would think so yes and and the reason
being that that it is about risk right
and women often times um again you know
a lot of this has to do with this this
the psychology that we've inherited and
and throughout most of our history women
were caring for young children I mean
this was you know kind of what our
bodies made us just have to do it's like
our our bodies are wired for having
babies right and this doesn't mean that
this is what women should do right or
what women need to do or that you know
that that this is somehow destining
women to do one you know this set of
activities but instead throughout most
of our history we spend a lot of our
time pregnant and caring for young
children and that has selected for our
psychology to be very risk sensitive and
risk averse and what we tend to see is
that women are more risk averse than our
men and we can see this play out in
terms of things like um gambling right
we know that overwhelmingly men tend to
be the ones who are gambling addicts
relative to women but also in terms of
good risks right because you do see
something like being a being an
entrepreneur for example which is
something that does come with a pretty
big risk attached to it meaning that you
know there's a big boom and bust um but
it the the risk associated with the
possibility of a bust um is something
that women's uh psychology is a is a
little bit less tolerant of relative to
men's I think one of the interesting
observations I've had as a investor but
also as an entrepreneur myself is that
there may be data to support the fact
that more men are likely to start
businesses but it doesn't necessarily
mean they're better at it and part of
that links what you said about this
relationship with risk because being
prone to risk in business doesn't
necessarily mean you're going to be good
at entrepreneurship and I often tend to
find that when you have a woman leading
a business they're much more accurate
and honest with their forecasting and
much more um yeah realistic about what
the business is actually capable of and
men tend to over
forecast um in terms of business
performance they tend so but then also I
think it's interesting because I had
Kevin o who's the shark on Shark Tank in
the USA say that in his portfolio of
investments from Shark Tank the best
performing Investments that he had were
women and I think again I think from
memory what he was saying was when it
comes to forecasting and um taking C
more calculated risks wom women tend to
be better at that than men right which
is an interesting it's interesting yeah
no I think that it's totally spoton um
that you know men tend to be riskier and
and they tend to have a little bit more
hubris I mean there there's a tendency
um to assume that they're going to and
have an exaggerated belief about how
successful they're going to be because
in part you know I think it It
ultimately boils down the to the
differences in our mating psychology and
then also the psychology of of parenting
compared to provisioning and I think
that for men um you know seeing the
world in a way that's distorted in terms
of assuming that things are going to be
better than they are is going to allow
them to be able to better attract mates
for example because they're buying their
own story you know it's like they're
buying their own story about how great
everything is going to be even if it's
not necessarily all that great um this
leads people to take risks and and with
big risks come big rewards and
historically evolutionarily for men
those rewards could potentially
translate into additional mating
opportunities that have a direct impact
on men's ability to pass down genes for
women it's not so much you know because
even if you have the best idea ever
that's going to get you access to the
greatest number of mates possible the
number of offspring that a woman can
potentially have into the future is
dependent completely on the limits of
her own reproductive biology so a woman
with access to 10 Partners can only pass
down the same number of genes as a woman
with access to one whereas the same
hasn't been true for men right for men
who have access to 10 Partners this can
lead to 10 times as many offspring as
what they can have if they have access
to one and this creates an asymmetry in
the potential benefits um Fitness
benefits related to men and women um
from winning big right and so men's
psychology is geared toward wanting to
do things that are and and having their
brain tell themselves stories about how
successful things are going to be to act
as a carrot that then leads them to want
to pursue those types of things even
when it's highly risky so if I become a
billionaire yeah then I can afford to
and I will
attract potentially hundreds of
thousands of Partners and then I can
have hundreds of thousands of kids
because I can afford to and I'm going to
have so much interest because I'm a high
resource High status male whereas a
woman if she becomes a billionaire she
can only have one kid every nine months
or 12 months whatever it is yeah yeah
and that's actually there's in
evolutionary biology there's a principle
behind that it's called the baitman
principle it refers to the fact that
men's fitness can increase with each
partner they have access to and for
women it tops out after one right so the
potential reproductive returns from
having access to novel Partners is
greater for men than it is for women
right and this does not mean that this
is what most men do right most men don't
translate their increased uh their
increased status and their increased
access to Resources by gaining access to
an AS astronomical number of Partners um
but historically that's something that
men sometimes do right if we look at
history um you'll see in particularly in
polygynous cultures where you have men
who are able to have access to multiple
partners at the same time those men who
have the most resources and have the
highest status tend to have multiple
wives right they tend to have a greater
number of children right and we are the
descendence of people who would
sometimes make that decision right and
so what we tend to see is that that has
shaped men's mating psychology and
shaped men's achievement motivation
psychology in ways that helps to promote
um you know gaining access to resources
in part because gaining access to
resources leads to a greater Fitness
return than what gets um is available to
women from doing the exact same thing
this wasn't a long time ago in human
history either because my granddad in
Nigeria mhm I I've never met the guy um
I don't believe he's still alive I've
never been close to to him um but I was
told that he had 10 or 14 wives right
and so I was told that I have 30 40
cousins in Nigeria right yeah I mean I'm
doing okay financially but I probably
don't have the means the means to meet
them all and become friends with all of
them um but uh yeah I uh that's pretty
pretty striking that just sort of one
generation above my dad was this a man
that had multiple wives and so when you
say that that's him that could be part
of passed down to me in some way yeah
that sort of proclivity to have to want
to acquire more resources so that I can
support more people it's quite
frightening I don't think that it's
something to be frightened of I think
that you know when we understand the the
tendencies that we've inherited I
actually think that it gives us greater
appreciation for the kinds of decisions
that we actually end up making why is it
that you know especially in um cultures
like the US and I think about in
European culture we're monogamous ly
mating you know species we we form these
long-term pair bonds and so then we also
have to ask ourselves you know given
that this is something that is possible
for men right to increase their um their
reproductive output simply by gaining
access to new partners why is it that
most men don't do this like what are the
benefits when you look at contemporary
hunter gatherer groups where humans are
living in ways that are more similar to
um the way that our ancestors likely
lived than what we do currently what you
tend to see is that those children who
have an investing father around their
probability of survival is vastly higher
than that of the children of women who
do not have an investing partner around
one of the other parts of the answer is
that women generally don't want to share
right and so what you get is um by men
being willing to restrict their own what
we call reproductive value which just
refers to the number of potential
children that they can have into the
future
that increases the quality of partner
they're going to be able to have because
most women don't want to share and so if
you are a woman who's of high value
meaning that you have a lot of the
qualities that men desire in their
Partners you can be really picky and say
no I'm not going to share and so if you
want to mate with me then that means
that you're going to have to make some
decisions because you know imagine that
you're a man and just based on all the
qualities that you have let's say that
your mate value is and let's assume that
mate value has a 1 to 10 scale okay so
there's a 1 to 10 scale and you're a
seven right all the qualities I'm just
I'm I'm not talking about you I'm
talking the Royal you and what if I to
do to be an eight well the reason the
reason the reason I'm making you and
again I'm saying the Royal you of seven
is because so just bear with me here
your value of seven is because you are
not really willing to commit to a
long-term relationship right so you're
you have all these resources and you
have you know and you've got your
attractiveness you've got your good
jeans and all the other things a dog
right yeah but you're not yeah exactly
you've got a podcast you got all this
like great stuff going for you but
you're not willing you're not going to
just you know commit your resources and
to to one person um and you meet
somebody who's just you know she's
amazing and she she also has a podcast
and she's gorgeous and and she's a nine
you can increase your value to her just
by Will being willing to invest by being
willing because women desire that
because women generally place a priority
on somebody's willingness to stick
around and continue invest to continue
to invest resources in just her you can
increase your value from a seven to a
nine or a 10 just by virtue of being
willing to commit how does a woman know
if I am high status or not like AR there
ways that I can just like signal that I
am if I go to the gym and then I don't
know I got nice after shaven perfume and
I'm wearing I don't know a cool t-shirt
what are what are the cues how does the
brain know that I'm a good reproductive
partner right yeah no that's a really
great question it's really interesting
because um a lot of the qualities that
men value in their Partners like for
women are things that are immediately
available just based on physical
appearance because we know that men have
um placed a priority on cues related to
fertility and reproductive value and
reproductive value is just essentially a
person's reproductive shelf life I mean
I was reading in your book about how
mating and attraction preferences change
for woman throughout her cycle yeah so
throughout a woman's 28 day cycle does
she always want a nice guy no so women's
partner preferences and the types of
qualities that women tend to prioritize
in their choice of Partners do change
across the menstrual cycle um and this
changes with our sex hormones so during
uh the early part of the menstrual cycle
both sets of sex hormones so our our
estrogen and progesterone which is our
second uh primary sex hormone they are
low and then as estrogen begins to
increase which is something that happens
as eggs start to mature in the ovary and
as the eggs are maturing they release
estrogen and as an egg as a dominant egg
is chosen and um begins to fully mature
so that way it will be released at
ovulation which is how many days into
the cycle um usually estrogen really
starts to Surge right around day nine of
the cycle but it really hits its like
High Point usually right around day 14
which is when ovulation occurs so
estrogen begins Rising sharply around
day nine of the cycle and again the
first day of the menstrual cycle is the
day that um is the day that your period
arrives so that's day one about day nine
so about a week and a half after your
period started most women will start to
have a pretty dramatic increase in
estrogen estrogen will climb climb climb
climb climb it will Peak around day 14
which um is when ovulation occurs and
this is when an egg of course is
released and pregnancy is possible from
sex so from day nine till day 15 till
day yeah till day 15 day N9 to day 15
are are usually like that's usually when
we sort of bookend the fertile window
and during this time not surprisingly um
women experience a change in their
sexual psychology right so women become
increasingly attuned to All Things sex
so what we tend to see is that women's
sexual desire increases right around
that time in the cycle women have more
sex during that time in the cycle women
masturbate more during that time in the
cycle and women become more exacting
about who it is that they desire as a
romantic partner or a sex partner and in
particular what we tend to see is that
as estrogen is increasing across the
cycle so too does women's interest in
cues that historically have been related
to high genetic quality or genetic
compatibility within their choice of
Partners so two of the traits that we
know to be particularly pronounced um in
terms of women's interest um near high
fertility in the cycle are cues related
to testosterone and masculinity and the
reason for this one is because
testosterone is a known imuno supressive
meaning that it has the effect of
suppressing the immune system and so
people who have relatively High levels
of testosterone this is a cue that their
bodies are in such good physical
condition right their immune system is
so strong and robust that it can handle
being suppressed by testosterone so
people who have higher testosterone are
believed to have greater
immunocompetence relative to people with
lower levels of testosterone and what we
tend to see is that low and behold um
during that Peak fertility time in the
menstrual cycle when estrogen is high
that women exhibit a greater preference
for cues related to testosterone in men
so we find for example that women desire
a more masculinized male faces voices
and behavior at high fertility in the
cycle compared to low fertility in the
cycle how do you test this you test this
by looking at what it is that women are
looking for and you look at it over time
so just to give you an example of one of
the sort of most robust studies that's
been done looking at this phenomenon
researchers had a group of women bring
home a bunch of little plastic tubes um
in a freezer bag and they had them spit
into these little um saliva collection
tubes every day of the cycle across two
menstrual cycles on those same days when
women were taking a saliva sample they
were also evaluating the attractiveness
of male faces and the thing that the
women didn't know is that the
researchers knew the testosterone levels
of the faces of the men that they had
them looking at because the researchers
had men come into the research lab
beforehand and took their morning
testosterone levels over the course of
several days to get an average morning
testosterone level for these men and so
when they got all the saliva samples
from the women they assayed all of their
saliva and they were able to look at
Women's estrogen changes across the
cycle and then how it related to their
facial preferences for men and what they
found was first that of course estrogen
tended to increase and Peak during this
fertile window so days n nine or so to
day 15 women's estrogen levels were high
and during this time what they also
found is that women's preference for for
testosterone levels in the faces of the
men they preferred also increased and so
there was this really beautiful overlap
between women's estrogen levels and
their preference for testosterone going
to show that estrogen loves testosterone
right so women during this estrogenic
phase in the cycle have a heightened
preference for cues related to facial
masculin masculinity they also have a
greater preference for vocal masculinity
so women at high fertility in the cycle
also like the sound of more masculinized
male voices they tend to like more
social dominance in terms of behavior um
relative to what we tend to see when
women are at low fertility in the cycle
so I'm more likely to get laid if I yeah
there you go I think that voice right
there that you did I think it's going to
get you all the girls think I do I do I
would I would try that one out at the
bar tonight they must then find that and
I think I read this in your work well I
did read it in your work I'm just
pretending I knew it um they also found
that men who have high testosterone
levels are more likely to be in a
relationship um the next year than men
that don't have high testosterone levels
yeah so we know that um we know from
research that not only you know do women
desire testosterone in their partners
women choose men with higher levels of
testosterone as their Partners so
they've done studies looking at whether
or not men are partnered over time right
based on what their testosterone levels
are at time one and then looking at
whether or not they're married at time
two and what we tend to find is that low
and behold men with higher levels of
testosterone are more likely to be
married at time too suggesting that men
are probably more likely to be chosen as
partners when they have higher levels of
testosterone relative to when they do
not
and something that I found really
bizarre and no one's ever explained to
me is I also read I believe it was in
your book or might been in a in a video
I watched of yours um they found that
men who had a
baby had plummeting testosterone levels
yeah like how does the how does the my
body know that I have a baby isn't that
fascinating like the exact mechanisms I
don't know exactly what they are but the
connection between the brain and the
rest of the body I mean it's it's it it
knows everything I mean it knows
everything and what the research finds
is that yes when men get into a
long-term relationship for example a
men's testosterone decreases a little
bit right and we tend to you know
culturally we have this narrative about
testosterone where it's like more is
better right and it's always seen as
something that men should have a lot of
and you see there's testosterone clinics
on all these different Corners um
because you know this idea that men need
lots of testosterone and to have low
testosterone means that you have a
problem but it doesn't always mean that
at all and what we tend to see is that
when men are get into a long-term
relationship testosterone takes a little
dip and when men have children that
they're caring for testosterone takes
another dip and the reason for this is
that it's not always in a man's best
interest to have their foot on the gas
pedal of sexual desire and attraction
all the time it's just not necessarily
the best thing to do if you're a man
engaged in a long-term relationship or
you're a man who's caring for young
children it would be better to take some
of that effort they'd be spend you know
looking at the next door neighbor and
you know looking at her shorts or
whatever it is that you're looking at
and instead using that effort to channel
it toward caring for your children
caring for your
partner so nice guys don't get laid as
much so nice guys might not get laid as
much and and when you look at short-term
casual sexual behavior in particular we
tend to find that the ones who are more
successful with that a mating strategy
tend to be men with higher levels of
testosterone there's just no question
about that nonetheless um being somebody
who's willing to invest and willing to
have long-term relationships with women
generally is going to get you in a good
position um to be able to find a partner
and this is something that anybody can
do to increase their value to women um
and so you could be somebody who has low
testosterone right you're lacking these
cues to um High genetic quality or even
genetic compatibility right like let's
say that your immune genes which is one
thing that women also pick up on at high
fertility is they tend to pick up on
qualities related to somebody having
different immune genes than themselves
men who are lacking these things
completely um Can can make themselves
desirable to women simply by virtue of
being the type of person who's willing
to in invest in a committed relationship
because it is something that women value
this is a bit of a side point and I
haven't seen this in na work but it just
came to mind cuz I was just thinking of
a conversation I had with one of my
friends attraction for me is such a
delicate thing it's almost it's almost
un it's well it is unconscious and I I
we often think of attractiveness as
maybe you know this body part on the
person is a certain shape or their face
looks like this but the older I've
gotten and the more I look back on my
life The more I've come to believe that
there's almost like a thousand tiny
little micro expressions or something in
the air which makes us attracted to
someone else and so when we're giving
people advice on how to be attract Ive I
wonder if most most of the advice is
pretty futile because it's deeper than
that right it's so much deeper than that
yeah so I and and you're totally right
about that I mean the fact is attraction
is idiosyncratic and finicky right so
all of us when we think about the things
that we find sexy and attractive um
there's going to be a lot of ways that
that you're going to disagree with other
people right like you're going to think
that somebody like is so sexy to you and
other people might say yeah you know
she's all right but it doesn't really do
it for them um and there's a there is an
element to our attraction that is very
person specific and idiosyncratic right
and may might there be some evolutionary
Roots behind all of that may be right so
it could be for example that the kinds
of qualities that you find you know just
really attractive in another person that
that make you feel so attracted to them
might be cued that they are a really
compatible mate for you and maybe that's
why you have a very sort of you specific
response to that person but there are
also Dimensions that are shared right so
we know for example that men tend to
place a greater emphasis relative to
women on cues related to physical
attractiveness and that physical
attractiveness tends to be related to
things that have historically been
related to fertility right so for
example having an hourglass body shape
we know that this is something that's
related to a woman's level of sex
hormones and that women with higher
levels of estrogen for example are more
likely to put on fat around their butt
and their thighs and less likely to put
on fat around their waist um relative to
women with higher or lower levels of
estrogen right as estrogen levels
decline when women age their bodies
become more straight up and down than
they do hourglass and this has to do
with changes in estrogen and um and so
we know that that's something that men
generally desire to a greater extent
than women right we also know that men
tend to PR place a greater emphasis on
cues related to youthfulness right so
the cues that are related to H maturity
in a face that's something that women
tend to have aen preference for so if
somebody has sort of an older you know
an older face um they they tend to be
seen as more attractive like so like
50-year-old George Clooney seems more
attractive most women think that that
looks more attractive than you know
25-year-old um George Clooney and and we
see that because our brains have
inherited this tendency to find cues
related to wisdom and status and
resource acquisition all of which come
with greater age um women have in have
inherited that preference for those
kinds of qualities because that would
have given them a mating related
Advantage relative to preferring a more
youthful face conversely for men they
would have been penalized if they had a
preference for maturity in the face of a
potential partner because if you like
women who have signs of maturity and
wisdom and resource acquisition ability
you'd probably choose somebody who's
approaching menopause right and that's
not going to lead to any Gene
transmission at all right and so we tend
to see that men have a heightened
preference for cues related to
youthfulness and faces and so even
though yes there are differen or there
are differences between individuals and
there is some idiosyncrasy that tends to
characterize human mate Choice there are
a lot of things that we can actually
make some pretty strong predictions
about too so there are some overall
themes that tend to characterize men's
and women's partner preferences is it
true that men are less attractive to
successful women is there any sort of
evolutionary basis for that I do know
that research finds that men don't place
as much of a priority on that that
compared to
women but I don't know that they
penalize them exactly right if you had
somebody if you show a man a photograph
of a woman who's dressed like a CEO and
she's gorgeous and you show a man a
picture of a woman who's dressed like a
Burger King service you know person and
she's drop dead gorgeous men are going
to find her similarly attractive in both
conditions it doesn't matter the woman
can be doing it doesn't matter what the
woman is doing and there's been research
that shows this they'll show men and
women photographs of people in different
types of outfits and the men's ratings
of how attractive the women are has just
everything to do with how attractive the
women are um for women rating men it all
depends on what they're wearing right do
they show cues to Resource access do
they not show cues to Resource access
and women tend to modulate how
physically attractive they find men
based on whether or not they have these
cues related to provisioning Ability so
I don't know if there was a really
attractive and there are a lot of really
attractive uh females in positions of
power um men will find them just as
attractive as they do somebody who's not
in a position of power although they may
be you know potentially less likely to
choose them as a long-term mate um you
know if there's issues related to power
dynamics and that sort of thing that
they don't want to mess with with what
about jealousy and
specifically is the term interex women
being jealous of women men being jealous
of men you mentioned a second ago that
if you know 60% of the college educated
or college attendees or 70% of them are
women and there's only a pool of 30%
which are men isn't there going to be a
ton of competition amongst women and
what direction does that competition
travel in is it low status women having
competition with high status women or is
it what is it I mean the competition
when you have cases where there's an
asymmetrical sex ratio and like we do on
college campuses I mean women are very
competitive amongst one another for
access to the men that are available and
oftentimes the way that this like the
form that this tends to take is that
women become increasingly likely to be
willing to do whatever men want of them
in order to be chosen as a mate and what
we've tended to see on college campuses
is because men are more or oriented
toward casual sex and non-committed
relationships than women are what we
tend to see is that short-term hookups
and Casual Sex tend to be very common on
college campuses and in part this is the
result of the fact that women are
competing for access to mates and one of
the ways that they can compete for
access to Mates is to be willing to do
whatever it is that men want in terms of
um providing you know the structure of
the relationship and if men are only
looking for casual sex even though women
are tend to be more oriented toward
long-term relationships they're going to
be um more inclined to just give in to
whatever it is that the men desire um as
a means to be able to get a partner are
women more competitive with beautiful
women or women that are
less stereotypically and socially
considered beautiful oh women are more
competitive with beautiful women I mean
there's just no question about that and
the reason for this is that given that
this is something that men desire and
their Partners um this is the primary
Dimension by which women compete for
access to Partners right and so this is
the big this is the big one um given men
place a really pretty strong priority on
physical attractiveness in their choice
of Partners and in fact one of the
biggest predictors of a woman's upward
social mobility in the US is how
physically attractive a woman is and in
fact that's a bigger predictor of a
woman's upward Mobility than her
education level or even her
socioeconomic status of origin when you
say upward social Mobility what do you
mean I mean the ability to transcend the
social class in which you were born okay
so if you're somebody who was uh you
know working class or middle class or
upper class your ability to transcend
those ranks of um of you know
socioeconomic status is um more strongly
predicted by physical attractiveness
than a woman's education level and
that's like a tough thing to have to
that's a tough nut to you know a tough
nut to crack tough pill to swallow
so women are more competitive
against beautiful women in the lens of
society and stereotypically yes and and
one of the ways that women compete
against one another is by derogating
their competitors right and derogating
their competitors just meaning saying
mean things about them or saying mean
things to them and a lot of times those
mean things that they have to say have
to do with a woman's attractiveness
right they'll try to downplay how
attractive she is to other people by
saying things like um you know oh she's
had a lot of work done right that's the
thing that you'll hear women say um
about each other or to men about other
women and and this is something that's
done to try to manipulate other people's
perceptions of that woman's value but
because attractiveness plays such an
important role in terms of a woman's
ability to successfully attract a
romantic partner um this is a dimension
in which women are fiercely competitive
even when they don't want to say that
they are and want to pretend that
they're not right I think that the
Barbie movie was you know sort of got at
some of these kinds of issues and just
this idea that women want to pretend
like none of this stuff matters right
that it's not that important and that we
don't value this stuff but nonetheless
um this is still a very important domain
of competition for women always has been
I think it probably always will be are
women more likely to trust a beautiful
woman or a woman that is less
stereotypically Beautiful cuz I was
thinking about this um this thing about
gay male shopping sales associates uhhuh
it was a test that you did right yeah so
this was I have um one of my former this
is digging deep so um this one of my
former students um who was really into
and so he's a gay man um and just to set
the stage for all of this he became
really interested in the friendship that
tends to form between gay men and
straight women which is actually
actually you know it there's a this is
something that happens everywhere so
having like the the gay man and the
straight woman friendship is something
that's not just you know something that
we see in Europe and the US it is sort
of cross-culturally ubiquitous and he
was trying to understand this
relationship and one of the things that
he noted in his research is that um the
people who tend to form friendships most
frequently with gay men are beautiful
women um it's like attractive women who
who are more competitive and potentially
May perceive more competition on the
part of other women and they form these
friendships because gay men can provide
them with really important information
um that's relevant on the mating Market
that is not colored by one intersexual
competition right so if you say do these
pants make me look fat right your um
your gay man friend isn't going to tell
you no they look great even though they
make you look terrible because they're
trying to send you out and look terrible
right so there's no like there's no
thread of competition in that
relationship and there's also not the
fear that this person's just trying to
get you in bed right and so there's this
there's this really nice trust um that
women can have with um with gay men this
is your brain on birth control yes why
did you choose to write this book I
chose to write this book because I was
on hormonal birth control for more than
a decade of my life and I'm a
psychologist who studies women and
women's
Brains and I had absolutely no idea that
any of the things that the birth control
pill does to the brain were happening to
me and so I went off of hormonal birth
control after being on it for more than
a decade
straight and when I went off it I felt
like I woke up it was like I had this
moment it was about 3 months after I
discontinued it where all of a sudden I
realized that over the last three months
like I'd been feeling things more deeply
I'd been interested in sex in a way that
I hadn't been in a long time I was
exercising and going to the gym again I
was downloading new music onto my what
was then an iPod um for the first time I
know and yeah it's like it's like a it's
like an archaic iPhone people I was like
downloading new music onto my phone and
my iPod I was cooking it was like I was
just interested in pleasure I had more
energy I was feeling things more deeply
and I thought what is this and I was on
it you know during the time that I was
on birth control I never had any issues
with it like I wasn't one of those
people who had uh negative mood related
side effects and I didn't know that I
was experiencing any side effects at all
and it was only after I went off of it
and started to realize how much more
alive I felt that I started to dig into
the research behind the way that
hormonal birth control changed changes
women and it was then that I learned
that people had been studying this in
some cases for 30 years on the way that
hormonal birth control changes the way
that women think feel and experience the
world and it was then that I knew that I
had to share this information with other
women because here I was as somebody
who's on the pill studies women studies
women's Brains I'd even published papers
on the effects of women's changing
hormones over the cycle and the way that
they influence women and it never even
occurred to me that my birth control was
changing me and I knew that if I didn't
know that the birth control pill was
changing me that nobody else knew it
either and so that led me to dig into
the science behind hormones hormonal
birth control um and how that changes
women um and I put together that book to
tell everybody the things that I learned
pretty dangerous subject matter to take
on it can seem like a dangerous subject
matter to take on and and you know and
for good reason uh hormonal birth
control and having a reliable way to
prevent pregnancy has been by far the
biggest game Cher that women have ever
experienced you know in history um
there's been nothing that has been more
instrumental to women's ability to be
able to achieve political and economic
independence for men than the birth
control pill um and because of this
saying anything that is critical of the
birth control pill um can be seen very
dangerous right because it's like um oh
no don't say that too loudly or else
they're going to take our birth control
away or oh no don't say that too loudly
like what else are we going to do um but
this book was really important to me to
be able to present to women all of the
different ways that hormones influence
us and the surprising ways that hormonal
birth control can change who we are in
the way that we experience the world and
then give that information to women so
that way when they're making decisions
about whether to be on or off of
hormonal birth control they have all the
information about the trade-offs that
they're making and this will allow them
then to make decisions about whether or
not to be on it depending on what's
going on in their own lives because
everything that I've learned about the
way that the birth control pill changes
women means that the answer that you
come to when you're asking yourself the
question do I go on this or do I not go
on this is going to be very woman
specific right for some women the
decision is still going to be yes I I'm
willing to make these trade-offs and for
other women the answer is going to be no
I am not willing to make these
trade-offs and whether or not we make
those sort of where we land on that is
going to differ depending on where we
are in our life and and so on and so
forth and so it was really important to
me to present this information as a way
to really Empower women to be able to
make informed decisions about who they
want to be right and how they want to
regulate their fertility what do you
wish you were told on that day when
you've first given that little packet of
pill pills what what do you think they
if they were been completely honest with
you and they knew what you know now what
is the sort of the list of things you
would have said to a young Sarah about
this decision to me the the one thing
and then we can kind of dive down into
what this all means but the thing that
would have really made a difference to
me is that your hormones make you who
you are and when you change your
hormones you change who you are right so
the birth control pill is going to
change you it changes the version of
yourself that your brain creates and so
if you're going to be going on this you
need to understand what that does so
this of course begs the question what
does it do right and there are several
things that the birth control pill does
right and there's at least five
different things that the birth control
B does to change who we are right it
changes our sexual desire and who we are
attracted to it changes our emotional
states right it can affect our moods it
can affect our ability to regulate and
to manage stress right it
influences sexual desire and sexual
function it influences our ability to be
able to put on muscle mass and affects
our like nutrition and fitness goals
right it affects all of us and not
knowing all of that and not knowing the
potential risks of having side effects
related related to mental health and
libido all the way to everything you
know to like who a person is attracted
to I wish I would have known that that
probably would have you know impacted
again um decisions that I would have
made about staying on it when I didn't
need to because there was there's no
reason to change who you are um if you
don't need the contraceptive benefits so
on that first point then it changes who
you're attracted to your sexual desire
how well so mechanistically the way that
this happens has everything to do with
the hormonal changes that are initiated
by the birth control pill and so just to
talk about the mechanics of this first
and then talking about the downstream
effects of it next um mechanically what
goes on when you take hormonal birth
control is you are suppressing ovulation
right and the way that that that birth
control does this is it does this by
giving you a combination of hormones or
a single hormone that tells your brain
not to stimulate the ovaries and not to
ovulate right and it does this by way of
a synthetic progesterone called a
progestin and progestin which are in all
forms of hormonal birth control when
they get picked up in the hypothalamus
in the brain that sends a signal that
the brain should not stimulate the
ovaries and should not lead to egg
maturation and egg development and when
this happens when the brain is not
stimulating the ovaries this means the
body is not producing estrogen right so
estrogen levels are kept really low and
instead you get this daily dose of a
synthetic progesterone or progestin that
is supplanting that right many forms of
hormonal birth control in addition to
having that synthetic progesterone or
progestin that's that turns off the
brain's communication with the ovaries
it also has a relatively low level of
estrogen that is also added so
combination hormonal birth control pills
contain progestin and a little bit of
estrogen but the estrogen levels are
kept really low and the progesterone
levels or the progestin levels are the
the dominant hormone and you get that
same hormonal message every day right
when you do that what happens when you
Flatline a woman's own production of
hormones and replace them with a daily
dose of synthetic progesterone this does
a few things to sexual like women's
sexual psychology the first thing that
it does is it turns off that estrogen
surge that you get right prior to
ovulation that's related to a heightened
preference for sex you know it Inc like
that estrogen surge is related to um an
increased preference for testosterone
markers and mates right it's related to
women's interest in sex it's related to
sexual function all of those things that
increase right prior to ovulation that
help to promote reproduction sexual
reproduction all of those things are
turned off on women on hormonal birth
control control because instead they're
getting the same daily message in which
progestin is the dominant hormonal
message and estrogen levels are really
low so that's the first thing that
happens but they they're still horny
right they're still uh yes I mean they
still will have sex and they still want
sex but many women report experiencing a
a real decrease in their libido when
they're on hormonal birth control that's
a very common response um and the reason
for this is twofold one one of the
things that's a big factor in promoting
women's sexual desire and um and libido
is estrogen and as estrogen is rising in
the cycle because when estrogen is
rising this is a time in the cycle when
sex can lead to conception this is
something that's known to fuel the
female sexual response so women's sexual
response and and their sexual desire um
all increases with estrogen levels
across the cycle so when you take
hormonal birth control and that's
flatlined which is what it does this
means that sexual desire is kept more
constant across the cycle so you do tend
to find that women who are using
hormonal birth control tend to have
fewer Peaks and valleys in sexual desire
than naturally cycling women do but on
the whole it tends to be lower the other
thing that happens on hormonal birth
control that can lead to a decrease in
libido is that all of those synthetic
hormones that are in hormonal birth
control they tend to lead to an increase
in what's known as sex hormone binding
globulin which is a real mouthful but
what it does is that this is a this is
something that's released by the liver
and it binds up free testosterone right
so it binds up testosterone and makes it
inactive in the body and testosterone
even though we tend to think of it as
like a guy thing and like this is a male
hormone um it's actually really
important in terms of promoting women's
sexual desire and women who are on
hormonal birth control have levels of
free testosterone that are about 60%
lower than that of their naturally
cycling peers and so what this means
again is that you have another you know
blow to women's sexual desire when
they're on hormonal birth control those
low levels of estrogen and then really
low levels of free testosterone those
two things work together to suppress
sexual desire in women and it can also
change attraction because as we noted
when women are approaching you know
ovulation their estrogen levels increase
and this is something that research
finds to be related to women's interest
in testosterone markers in men
researchers more recently said if that's
true you know what happens when you put
women on hormonal birth control and
estrogen levels are kept really low and
what they find is that low and behold
women who are using hormonal birth
control do seem to have a dampened
preference for cues related to
masculinity and testosterone
in Partners relative to what's observed
in naturally cycling women which
specifically means that a woman on birth
control is less likely to be interested
in a guy who is what a guy who has um
really masculinized features so for
example if you see a face um that has
high levels of testosterone generally
men um will have like more deep set eyes
they tend to have a wider jaw in in the
IES they tend to have broader shoulders
in a more narrow Waist Deep men with
more deep voices men who have um cues to
like behavioral cues to social dominance
that's also something related to
testosterone and what the research finds
is that women who are using hormonal
birth control do prefer a less
masculinized male face relative to what
is observed in naturally recycling women
I mean this is slightly concerning if
you're a man right because if my
partner's on the pill and and then she
comes off the pill she might not like me
right yeah no and that's like a that's a
real important question I mean it's very
provocative cuz what does that mean and
there have been some research studies
that have looked at that exact question
and one of the best studies that's
looked at this question is one that was
a longitudinal study of married couples
they followed women who were using
hormonal birth control at the time that
they met their partner and then they
just followed them over time to see what
would happen when women discontinued the
pill what happened when they
discontinued was that there were real
significant changes in how attracted
women were to their partner um depending
on whether they chose them using
hormonal birth control but what was
interesting about it is whether the
women became more or less attracted to
their partner depends on how attractive
their partner was and so what the
researchers found is that women who were
partnered to attractive men when they
went off hormonal birth control they
were more attracted to their partner and
were more sexually attracted to their
partner and more sexually satisfied
within their relationship relative to
where they were beforehand but for women
who were partnered with less attractive
Partners they had the opposite effect so
when they went off hormonal birth
control they became less attracted to
their partners and reported being less
sexually satisfied with their Partners
than where they were beforehand and so
this suggests that yes it is a very real
possibility that if you um have a
partner who chose you when you're using
hormonal birth control that this can
change attraction within the context of
the relationship but whether that's good
or bad probably depends on a bunch of
other dimensions that you need to take
into effect including partner's
attractiveness so if you're not a very
good-look guy you probably want have to
stay on it run for the hills no I mean
honestly you know it's one of these
things where you know this is you can
really quickly become alarmed with this
right the good news is this and that is
most women who are who choose their
Partners when they're on hormonal birth
control go off of hormonal birth control
and then there's really not a huge
shakeup in their relationship right and
the reason for this is the way that
hormones influence us is they kind of
nudge us a little bit one way or the
other right they kind of nudge us toward
preferring this type of mate or that
type of mate it's generally not these
big sweeping changes where all of a
sudden it's like the w off your eyes and
you're like what in the world was I
thinking right these are little nudges
it's just that for some people who were
teetering on the edge of not necessarily
being attracted to their partner going
off hormonal birth control can tilt them
out of Attraction right the same is true
for i' I've talked to people who've had
the experience of feeling like they were
lesbian and all of a sudden they feel
like they're bisexual or women who are
bisexual and then they go off of the
pill and all of a sudden they realize
that they're not interested in women
anymore I mean it's like sexual
orientation attraction of All Sorts
whether it's you know who you're
attracted to in terms of the sex you're
attracted to or who you're attracted to
in terms of the specific partners that
you're attracted to all of those things
are influenced by sex hormones and you
know when sex hormones kind of nudge you
this way or the other way depending on
where you fall in that distribution of
you know sort of where you are in terms
of sexual orientation or am I attracted
to this mate or that mate those people
who are on the Tails can get nudged into
a place that puts them into the
uncomfortable situation where they
realize that they're no longer attracted
to the person they chose on the pill as
a man is my attraction going to change
if my partner comes off the pill um so
there is evidence that suggests that
women are more attractive to men when
they're naturally cycling relative to
when they're on hormonal birth control
and so chances are if you have a partner
um that you are attracted to when she's
on hormonal birth control when she goes
off of it it's actually going to lead to
an increase in attraction so there's a
ton of research that finds that men find
women sexiest they think that they smell
better they think that they you know
that they look more
attractive men will tip women more um at
you know at strip clubs when the women
are at high fertility across the cycle
relative to low fertility across the
cycle meaning that men are cued into
estrogen levels and scent V phys you
know visual appearance and even just the
way that women act and move so they've
done studies where they have um men
looking at women moving um seeing just
seeing their Silhouettes move like
behind a sheet right so they'll see
women walking or dancing and they have
them walking or dancing at high or low
fertility across the cycle and men find
the women more attractive when they just
see their outlines moving at high
fertility compared to low fertility so
men's brains are wired to pick up on
estrogen cues and this makes perfect
sense when we consider the evolutionary
process that designed us right because
over the course of evolutionary history
men who were really dialed into women's
estrogen levels they would have passed
down more genes than men who didn't
really pay attention to those cues
because estrogen across the lifespan is
linked with fertility and estrogen
across the cycle is linked with
fertility right it's a it's linked with
fertility no matter which way you look
at it and so men who are really queued
into um estrogen levels they would have
done really well um and so if you are a
man your partner chose you when she was
using hormonal birth control and now all
of a sudden she starts cycling again my
guess is that most men will experience
an increase in attraction to their
partner particularly at high fertility
in the cycle because there's so much
research that suggests that this is
exactly what should go on here's a
here's one where I've put a few dots
together if my partner is on the birth
control pill
are my testosterone levels going to be
lower that's a fascinating question and
it's one I'm super interested in so I
actually was just I just had this
conversation not that long ago with my
my graduate students in my lab there is
research that suggest that men's
testosterone levels increase in response
to the scent of fertile women right so
when women are at high fertility if men
sniff t-shirts that they were wearing or
in one study they actually had men
sniffing the
air that was being uh piped through a
nebulizer that had a woman's panty liner
in it that was either worn at high or
low fertility so smelling um women's
vaginal secretions both of those things
have been shown in research to be
related um to an increase in
testosterone levels in men so it
increases men's testosterone levels to
be around these cues to high fertility
so what happens then when men are
spending their time or are partnered
with some some who's on hormonal birth
control right so given that um estrogen
levels can increase testosterone does a
lack of estrogen presence lead to lower
levels of testosterone on average and
this is a question that we do not have a
research answer to but it's one that's
incredibly fascinating because here we
are right 2024 almost
2025 and we have a testosterone crisis
on our hands right men's testosterone
levels are much lower um than what they
used to be 50 year even 50 years ago and
it's possible that one contributor to
this is the fact that so many women are
using hormonal birth control and when
you have on average lower levels of
estrogen in the population might this
then also predict lower levels of
testosterone in men and the answer to
that is we don't know and another
possibility with that by the way and one
that I I think is so interesting is you
know we talked about kids and we talked
about the fact that men's testosterone
levels um will decrease when men are in
long-term relationships and then they'll
decrease a little bit more when men uh
have children that they're caring for
and another possibility for men's
lowered levels of testosterone I mean in
addition to all the you know trash
that's in the water and you know all the
chemicals that were um that were exposed
to is the fact that men are now
responsible for more caregiving and you
know than than they ever have been in
history right with many women you know
being in the workforce men are having to
also do more in the home than they ever
did before and so it's also possible
that some of the differences that we see
in testosterone levels that have changed
over time may be the result of men um
their bodies actually decreasing
testosterone uh production in response
to their changing roles in the home
which is also sort of a fascinating
possibility are you all concerned that
there'll be a bit of a population
collapse if we don't start having more
kids gosh you know I have thought about
I don't I I can't spend you know it's
like if you talk about something like
that it almost sounds like like you can
take the next step and say that it's
everybody's you know obligation to
reproduce that women need to be having
more babies and so I I hasten
like if if if I say yes I do think about
that I hasten to add that um that it's
you know not women's responsibility to
make sure that they're having babies but
I do wonder what's going to happen you
know because people are not reproducing
the way that they used to and um and
there's a lot of people now who are
choosing not to have children at all and
so what is that going to do I I have no
idea but I I don't think it's
necessarily going to be good every
single time you eat you have an
opportunity to improve your health
that's why I love Zoe because it helps
me to make the smartest food choices for
my body as you guys probably know Zoe is
a sponsor of my podcast I'm also an
investor in the company which is
important to say I invested in the
company because Zoe combines My Health
Data with their worldclass science using
these two things Zoe guides me to Better
Health every single time I make a food
choice and eat which means I have more
energy better sleep better mood and I'm
less hungry and the best part about Zoe
is that it's backed by their recent
clinical trial something called the
method study which is the gold standard
of scientific research I started Zoe
just over a year ago now and I've been
able to track my progress week after
week so I can learn how to be even
smarter the week after and if you
haven't joined Zoe yet I'm going to give
you 10% off when you joined Zoey today
just use the code Steven 10 at checkout
so many of you have asked me for a
bloody code for Zoe and here is your
opportunity stevenh turn at checkout
there may not be another one quick one I
want to tell you about a new health
product/ Gadget that's had a big impact
on my life but also my partner's life
they are a sponsor of this podcast and
me and my partner are both quite
obsessed with it now it is the Bon
charge infrared SAA blanket have you
ever heard of an infrared sauna blanket
before infrared sauna blankets are
designed to give you the exact same same
benefits of infrared saers that you find
at gyms and spas and health clubs but
they're portable you can use them at
home you can use them when you travel
and anywhere in between it heats the
body directly rather than the air around
you and for me when I use the bond
charge infrared sa a blanket before I
sleep my sleep scores go up I'm better
recovered the next day when I go to the
gym because it helps with circulation
and stiffness and muscle soreness but
also infrared is associated with really
improving your skin they are a sponsor
of this podcast and because of that
they've offered all of you listeners a25
% discount when you try Bond charges
infrared SAA blankets today to get that
discount use the code diary at checkout
and you'll also get free shipping and a
year-long warranty head to bonch
charge.com diary and get started on your
in Fred SAA Journey today just for a
second because I've had so many
conversations on this podcast about
men's issues and the state of the the
world for men right now it's quite an
interesting moment with like the
depression statistics and suicidality
and sexlessness and all these
things and I don't know if you you've
even got an answer to this question but
what advice would have you got a son I
do what advice do you give to a young
man how old is he he's he's 15 he's 15
perfect he's like right at the age where
he's just about to figure out what it is
to be a man right what advice are you
giving to him about like what is a good
man in the modern world right I mean is
it okay to be masculine like yeah yeah
no I yes I think I think that there's I
think there's room for masculinity like
I and
honestly sex demands it I mean I I so I
teach a class called Evolution sex in
the brain and one of the things that we
talk about is just how problematic um
you know sex has become because there's
so much of a a dance with like seduction
you know it's like everybody knows when
um sort of you know masculinity has gone
too far it's like you know it when you
see it when somebody is you know like
touching a woman when she's asking not
to be her or is harassing somebody it's
like we all know what that looks like
but then there's also you know seduction
requires like Ian the whole idea of
Seduction is this idea that men um can
lead women into sexuality and so trying
to have a conversation with my son about
you know it's like everything has to you
know he has to make sure that if he's um
interacting with girls that there is
consent and that that it's consensual
any sort of a physical touch that goes
on but at the same time you know like I
would never at the you I can
imagine thinking you know is it okay if
I touch your breast you know like like I
can't imagine that I can't imagine
living in that world I mean it's it's a
really tricky world to be in being a
male is hard I mean that's like a hard
hard line to toe because on the one hand
you're you know you don't want to do
something that's obviously going to be
detrimental or hurtful to a woman or
violate her in some way but on the other
hand you know you can go too far with
the permissions in a way that can be
really bad for sex and um because
attraction and sexual desire is all
about sort of the pushing the pull of
the masculine and The Feminine but also
if you're if you're a low status male
like I was at the start of my career
when I'm 18 no money like working in a
call center you know not really any
friends can't Pro can barely well
couldn't provide for myself let alone
anybody else right and in terms of
dating Dynamics I often hear that the
like top 10% of men are pretty much
having all the fun right yeah that's
probably true and then the bottom 50% of
men haven't had sex for like a year or
something crazy like that so if you're
in that bottom 50% and but that's not
the case going the other way is it
because it's much easier for a woman to
acquire sex if she sort sort it I mean
you did studies on this right right well
yeah I mean if a woman is looking for
sex it's not hard to find like any woman
who is um listening to this right now if
she decided to go and have sex tonight
she'd probably be able to find a taker
what was the study of the actor the
beautiful actor on a campus oh yes no
that's a wonderful study so that's a
classic social psychology study that was
done at the University of Florida a
number of years ago what the researchers
did is they had a male and female model
so an really attractive person
approached strangers on campus and they
would introduce themselves they would
just say hello I've been noticing you
around campus and find you very
attractive and after they made this
introduction they would then follow this
with one of three requests it would
either be would you like to go on a date
with me would you like to go back to my
apartment with me or would you like to
go and have sex with me right and then
they simply made note of what the said
right did they say yes or did they say
no and what they found was that for both
men and women 50% agreed to the date
right so I've been noticing around
campus I find you very attractive would
you go on a date with me 50% of men 50%
of women said yes after that the sexes
diverged in pretty pretty marked ways
right what they found is that very few
women almost zero women said yes to go
back to the apartment with the person
and a full 0% of women said that they
would go back and have sex with the
person this isn't what they found for
men right for men what they found was
that men were more likely to agree to go
back to somebody's apartment with them
than they were to the date and men were
most likely to agree to just have sex
almost 80% of men agreed yeah I would
love to go and have sex with you and the
men who said No usually were in a
relationship right or noted that like
their parents were in town and they
wouldn't be able to go back to their
apartment and so so this goes to show
some real differences when it comes to
men's and women's sort of tendency
towards sexual opportunism and the fact
is you know historically women have had
huge costs related to sexual behavior
just simply because women to reproduce
have a minimum investment of 9 months
time in pregnancy and then subsequent
time spent breastfeeding right and so
for women who were sexually
opportunistic in other was willingness
to con willing to consent to sex without
strings or investment women would have
been penalized for that right because
throughout most of our evolutionary
history that could result in a pregnancy
and it could result in a pregnancy for
which you have no one to help co-invest
for men on the other hand being willing
to consent to sex without commitment
that's an evolutionary win right that's
a potential Gene transmission
opportunity because short-term sex of
course can lead to pregnancy and if
there is no expectation of further
investment it's very low cost right so
the costs and benefits related to
short-term casual sex are vastly
different depending on whether or not
you have a male or female body so if
your son comes home one day and says mom
listen I've tried my best um I can't
seem to persuade a woman to give me a
chance right then I would say go to the
gym and be a nice guy well I mean
honestly be a nice guy
well no but nice guys can can form
relationships right if he's looking for
a girlfriend I think one of the ways
that you can get a girlfriend is by
being willing to being willing to invest
in a woman like if you're a jerk you
know you're going to have a harder time
um even if you're an attractive jerk if
you were like an attractive nice guy
you'd probably do better as long as
you're not too nice right because that
might give off like low testosterone
cues I'm not really sure but these like
bad boys they seem to
get a lot of the sort of sexual
attention right what is that about but
that's but that's like despite the fact
that they're bad boy I mean so so it
depends on how we're defining Bad Boys
okay so little bit yeah yeah so a lot of
those are cues related to testosterone
right so having you know being risk
tolerant so being willing to do things
that are really risky um and you know
and and being a little bit arrogant
because you know you're always going to
succeed I mean those are cues related to
status and related to sometimes uh
testosterone levels right and so we know
that women like both of these things in
their partners and so because of that
those men will tend to do pretty well on
the mating market for for men who um you
know don't have those quality so so men
who are not you
know risk seeking and are not arrogant
um that's not necessarily going to not
do them favors unless that also is you
know an indicator that they
have other qualities that aren't working
for them you can have somebody who's
very
successful right and has high
testosterone who's not a jerk right and
that guy will do pretty well why would
you tell your son to go to the gym I
would tell my son to go to the gym
because um it's like one way that you
can naturally increase your testosterone
levels is by building muscle and also
another thing that that does um is that
muscle mass is related to reductions in
anxiety and the reason for this is
because if you're a big dude it means
that you're going to be able to protect
yourself and so your brain makes the
adjustment and it makes you more
confident and less anxious when you have
um when you have some muscle mass and so
I would say go and do those things and
then also doing the things that you can
to get access to resources and Status
right so study and work hard um because
ultimately people who do that tend to do
well and people um who do well
financially and do well in terms of you
know ascending the status hierarchy they
tend to also do well in the mating
Market if they're men have you got a
daughter I sure do your daughter comes
home mom I've tried my best and no one's
interested right yeah no so for my
daughter then I would say then you just
need you need to wait right you are
probably you are probably in the wrong
you are probably in the wrong mating
pool um would be my would be my advice
to her why uh my advice are well because
so a few things so many of the things
that women um sort of possess that men
desire in their choice of Partners um
are things that women don't have that
much control over right it's like a
woman's like Youth and and reproductive
value and these things related to
fertility you would tell her to hate the
gym I I mean I guess I might tell her to
hit the I might tell her to hit the gym
it probably make her feel better but I
don't think that I would tell her like
you know should probably go and get your
hair done and you know um I'm trying to
think oh well go off the birth control
pill so that if if she was on the birth
control pill which she is not um but I'm
just thinking in an abstract way like
what I would what I would tell her like
things that women can do to increase
their attractiveness to men I mean it's
like okay go be more beautiful like what
are you going to say um and so like I
said my real advice if my daughter said
this would I would say you
like probably need a different pool of
mates what if she was 35 if she was 35
hm good question so if she was 35 what
would I recommend like is this like what
I would actually recommend to my
daughter or do you are you trying to get
at like what should a woman do because
here's here's I I have two different
answers right so if a woman is just like
looking for if you want me to write a
pamphlet called 35-year-old woman here
are the things you need to do to find a
partner I mean it would have a whole
list of unsavory like things that you
know I mean it would be like consider
Botox men are attracted to women who
have features related to Youth and
fertility consider having a Brazilian
buttlift because men are also interested
in this why don't you also consider you
know um spending time on your hair and
makeup but I don't think I would write
that book you know that's not the advice
that's not the advice that I would I
would give do men find confidence
attractive in women cuz this is I was
thinking about this as you're speaking
because I I can think of many people
that I know many women and men but many
women that I know that are um you know
maybe you know approaching their 40s and
they're
beautiful but they're single and they
don't want to be single and it's not
necessarily it's not necessarily a
physical thing it appears but it seems
to be more of like a self-esteem
confidence thing and I can see how in
men confidence matters like if they're
stood up straight and they exert those
like those signals of dominance or not
dominance but like a high status right
that' be attractive is it the same in
women are men attracted to like
confident women yes and no so women who
are seen as more confident like that is
seen as more attractive for example like
somebody who has some self assurance of
themselves instead of you know sort of
like kicking their toe on the ground
generally um people find that attractive
both men and women but the degree to
which that is prioritized is hugely
different between the Sexes and if you
are a woman and you sort of go out and
exude those cues related to like social
dominance for example and social
status that's not going to necessarily
get you a mate and in some cases it
might actually detract from your
attractiveness as a mate because people
seem to view women who are in positions
of power more negatively than how they
perceive men men and women who are in
positions of power there's sort of
a there's a there's definitely a double
standard there and there and this is
something that has been fairly well
studied where they find that there's
nobody more
polarizing in the world than powerful
women so for example you know somebody
like KLA Harris who is running for
president um people seem to either
really love her or really hate her um so
there's this polarization that happens
with powerful women this happens for
anybody who's run for any political
office that is a female you get these
sorts of issues and women who are
confident and um and uh direct and
assertive are seen as being cold and and
you know like we call girls bossy right
when they have these kinds of qualities
whereas if it's a boy or men it's like
leadership potential and so there is a
double standard in how we tend to
perceive this and and it's not you know
over over the course of evolutionary
history women did well when they chose
um High status men right that would have
prefer that would have given them
preferential access to resources for
themselves and their children we don't
get that same kind of a pattern for men
choosing women right men who chose women
who were you know high in status and um
you know socially dominant that doesn't
necessarily translate into anything
that's going to correspond to increased
reproductive success bit of a
sort of correlated but uncorrelated
Point people talk about daddy issues and
in your work I've I've kind of seen
hints of an explanation for daddy issues
I if my father isn't around that has a
big impact on who I am is there any
truth to this idea that people can have
Daddy Issues yeah no there absolutely is
and so and when I when I say this you
know Daddy Issues just simply referring
to the fact that women whose fathers are
not invested in them or absent during
childhood that these women women will
tend to have more unrestricted or
precocious sexual development and sexual
behavior relative to what we see in
women who grow up with investing dads so
just to give you an example of some
research that's been done looking at
this research finds that women who grow
up in a household without an investing
dad so Dad is either gone or dad is
there but you know in name only so he's
not really investing and and um in in
the family those women go into puberty
significantly earlier they undo girls
who grow up in two parent homes with
investing fathers they also tend to have
an earlier age at which they begin
having sex relative to women who have
two dads in the home um and they tend to
have um a greater number of sexual
partners sort of overtime relative to
girls who grow up with two parents in
the home wouldn't they then also go into
menopause area that's a really great
question and um there is some evidence
that suggests that there may be a
decrease in ovarian reserve that might
go on but there hasn't been anything
linking that to
just yet which is the the amount of eggs
they have in their ovies what role does
the father play on our sexual
preferences and decision- making so if
my if my dad am I taking as a woman do I
take cues on what a good partner is from
looking at my
dad I have not seen any research that
has looked at that I've seen some
research looking at whether women prefer
Partners who are kind of similar to
their dads do they um and they they do
seem to um and which is interesting in
its own right um but I do not know
anything about men like and their
preferences and whether or not their
sons then tend to emulate those
preferences that's an interesting
question so on the on the subject of
stress what is the impact that the birth
control pill has on how woman
experiences stress well the research
finds that when women are on hormonal
birth control that they have a blunted
cortisol response to stress and cortisol
is a stress hormone right and we all
know it as this bad guy right this idea
like oh no high cortisol and that's you
know seen as something that's bad
because when you experience high levels
of cortisol for a long period of time it
actually is bad right so chronic stress
causes all kinds of problems right it
makes you put on visceral fat so it
makes you put on belly fat it um dumps
fat and blood into your bloodstream um
in ways that can raise your
triglycerides and put you at a greater
risk for heart and cardiovascular
problems it's not good um but having
Dynamic spikes in cortisol in response
to stressful events is actually
incredibly adaptive um and it's
something that allows us to be able to
regulate manage and cope with stress
right there's a reason we experience
cortisol in response to stress and what
what research finds is that for women
who are using hormonal birth control
that you get a no you know a blunted or
absent cortisol response to stress and
this is the sort of thing that we tend
to see in people who've experienced PTSD
or trauma because people who've
experienced PTSD in trauma their stress
responses um get shut down by their
bodies because they've experienced so
much stress that their body is like no
more cortisol released for you because
cortisol in the long term is not good
right it is it is detrimental to the
body and so what research finds is that
people with PTSD and people who've had
trauma they have a blunted or absent
cortisol response to stress because
their body just doesn't allow them to
release it anymore because it's
chronically being released and we see
the same thing in women who are using
hormonal birth control so they
experience a blunted or absent cortisol
response to stress and this is something
that can lead to disregulated responses
and everything ranging from their immune
system which um is regulated in part by
cortisol because that helps to regulate
the inflammatory response that we have
both to stress and also injury and it
can lead to things like our ility to
regulate our emotional responses because
we know that cortisol has something to
do with that as well and we know from so
much research now that women who are on
hormonal birth control that they have um
dysregulations in um in emotional
responses oftentimes with these women
being at an increased risk for
developing um things like uh anxiety and
depression right and this may in part
have something to do with the
differences that we have in uh cortisol
in your book you mentioned that in a
study in DeMont women on the pill were
50% more likely to be diagnosed with
depression within 6 months of starting
the pill compared to naturally cycling
women and researchers showed that women
who were on the pill were two times as
likely to have attempted suicide than
naturally cycling women yeah it's pretty
Stark I mean there are some real risk
factors that come up when women are
using hormonal birth control and these
are things that often times are swept
under the rug by their doctors who are
prescribing it right the fact is
especially especially for teenage girlss
going on hormonal birth control can
significantly increase your risk of
developing a mental health disorder and
attempting or being successful at
suicide and this is something that's
absolutely necessary especially for
mothers of young girls and young girls
who are being put on these pills because
they're the ones who asymmetrically bear
the burden of the increased risk of
mental health related problems and the
about these girls is that we don't know
whether or not these patterns are
reversible because the teenage brain is
still developing and to go into a
teenage brain that's still developing
and suppress normal hormonal variation
that occurs across the cycle and instead
replace it with synthetic hormones we
have no idea what this does to brain
development and this is an important
question because brain development that
occurs during the puberal transition
that is when the brain is remodeling
itself from its child version of itself
into the grown-up version of itself that
remodeling job is being coordinated by
sex hormones and so the idea that we're
going to replace that you know these nor
these naturally occurring variation in
sex hormones and replace it with
synthetics and that is not going to have
any impact on brain development doesn't
seem realistic how old is your daughter
she's 17 17 so she's right she's she's
at the age now where she's making the
decision you mentioned Ellie she's not
on birth control yes how did you feel
feel when it came time to make that
decision I mean for me it's all about
like what you know weighing the risks
and the benefits and so for me the first
you know risk and benefit question is is
there a risk that this person is going
to get pregnant right and so if she's
not in a sexual relationship I don't
have to worry about it it's a no-brainer
you're not going on hormonal birth
control if she is sexually active then
the question becomes is there a way that
we can protect her from pregnancy that
doesn't introduce these exogenous
hormones these synthetic hormones that
are going to shut down her own hormone
production and potentially impact brain
development thankfully there are options
um so there's not great right and
they're not for everyone but for example
um there's the copper IUD which is an
intrauterine device that um that
prevents pregnancy without changing
women's sex hormones and so I think
that's a really good option for sexually
active teenagers is that the coil it's
yes it's the coil it's the it's the um
it's the copper coil because there's two
different types of coils where does that
go it goes up in the vagina it goes up
um into the cervix okay and it sits
there for a long time sits there for a
long time sits there for like 5 years is
how long it can stay in there without
having to be replaced and it's a really
great option um for women to be able to
protect themselves without having to
think about it right and that's really
important when we're talking about
teenagers because a lot of times they
don't make the best decisions um their
frontal lobes are not done done to
developing and because of this they
don't always plan and they don't always
think things clearly you know think
think things through clearly um and so
for a teenager who's not necessarily
going to be all that on top of things
when it comes to using things like
condoms which is a barrier method that
requires that you actually use the
condom right you can't just have them um
and then protect yourself from pregnancy
or something like the fertility
awareness method which is where women
keep track of where they are in their
cycle and then um you know and then uh
use or abstain from sex or use a barrier
method when they're at high fertility um
and then they don't have to worry about
it at low fertility I don't necessarily
recommend those highly for teenagers if
possible just because it requires a lot
of thought and like I said teenagers
aren't always great at thinking through
things what about that thing that goes
in the arm a lot of the girls in my
school when I was in secondary school
were getting the little thing in their
arm yeah so that is the implant so
that's um here in the US the one that
people are on is called nexplanon and
that gives a same it gives a daily dose
of a um synthetic progesterone or a
progestin and that daily dose of that
hormone is of course keeping the brain
from stimulating the ovaries and so it's
keeping hormones flatlined and so that
is something that yes is incredibly
effective and yes it is brainless
because you don't have to think about it
which is great because the best birth
control is birth control that you don't
have to think about but you're getting a
daily dose of this hormone hormone
that's shutting off your ovulation and
so you're going to experience all of the
changes that women experience when using
hormonal birth control when you're using
that right it can change who you're
attracted to it can change your sex
drive it can change your mood it can
change your ability to regulate your
stress response it can change your
ability to put on muscle mass from
working out there's some new research
that finds that women who are using
hormonal birth control who are doing the
exact same exercises as women who are
naturally cycling over a 12we per period
right put on less mus muscle mass and
had lower levels of testosterone
relative to what you see in the women
who are naturally cycling and of course
that's what they find because women who
are using hormonal birth control their
testosterone levels are kept suppressed
and this is one of the big stimulators
that we know of muscle growth and same
with um ampk levels are tend to be high
when estrogen is high and that's also
something that promotes mus muscle
growth and that's lower in in women who
are using hormonal birth control
relative to Natural cyclers um and so
you know it also can influence that it
influences everything and so the idea
that you know um hormonal birth control
is the answer for women when it comes to
regulating fertility um I just don't
think that it is you know it's an answer
and it's one that we need to we need to
make sure all women have access to it
who need it but you know my whole
message with everything with my book and
everything else has always been and we
need more answers like we need better
answers and it seems like things might
be moving in that way there's more
research being done on things um that
you know male contraception and not just
male hormonal contraception I don't
think that's the answer either because
the idea of suppressing men's hormone
production to such an extent that they
no longer produce viable sperm which is
how they're looking at it by the way I
don't think that's the answer that's
just sh I think men would sign up is
that crazy no no I don't think men would
sign up either I'm like who would take
this I'm like who like this is madness
but that's what they're working on and
it just shifts the problem you know it
shifts it onto men but there are some
really interesting things that are
happening in terms of like for example
there's um can ask you a question on
that do you think that if the shoe was
on the other foot and men had to take
the pill so suddenly there was a thing
that came out and it's like oh you're a
man and you can take a pill it messes
with your hormones a little bit they're
going to be like artificially um
replaced with this pill do you think men
would take it
no no I don't I think some men would but
do I think most men would take that
absolutely not no way no way Jose I
wouldn't take it I'm just going to be
honest I would I don't know anybody I
honestly I don't know any men who' say
yeah sign me up for that I mean the fact
is like if you look anywhere so why do
women take it women take it because we
have no choice okay cuz you're going to
B yeah it's like we're the ones who get
stuck with the pregnancy you know for
for men their other option like if they
say no I'm not going to take this is
that their partner will be on the pill
but then if the partner's not on the
pill either you have the partner's not
on the pill then um you know then
they've got to figure something else out
but a lot of times what ends up
happening is the women end up going on
the pill and it's because for women
pregnancy is so costly yeah that it's
hard for us not to be the ones who are
bearing the the price of of birth
control because the fact is we're always
the one who who end up ultimately having
to pay the largest cost your daughter
she's 17 years old you said that when
you went on the birth control pill it
changed you and after you came off it
you quote unquote woke up uhhuh so of
course you're presumably you're scared
of your Lo changing your daughter right
and how how I mean under your analogy
she'd be asleep right yeah yeah no I
don't want I don't want that and I also
especially don't want that when she's
during this period in her life when her
brain is still developing because like I
said there has been hardly any research
that has looked at what happens to brain
development when you introduce synthetic
sex hormones to women when their brains
are
developing and the research that does
exist looking at this question doesn't
paint a very good picture of it it looks
like it can put women on a long-term
risk of developing major depressive
disorder over the course of their
lifetime even after they've gone off of
it and so no I don't you know I the idea
of having my daughter on hormonal birth
control is not
something that I want to have happen
especially when her brain is developing
she text you now and says I'm gonna
start taking the pill mom how do you
feel how would I feel I would feel like
if that was the best I mean if if if she
really couldn't tolerate the the iug the
the copper iug that doesn't have the
hormonal side effects then I would say
better that than
pregnant the fact is teenage pregnancy
is one of the biggest predictors of a
woman ending up in poverty and that's a
much bigger deal than whether or not a
woman feels like she's awake or asleep
and so sadly that's where we are and
it's my hope that as we move forward and
the more that we start to recognize that
birth control as an issue for women
hasn't been solved right and that we
need more options besides just changing
women's hormones it's my hope that
things are going to get better and that
we push for more options I mean I think
that it's so long been consider you know
we think that birth control is solved
and and it's not and so I'm I'm hoping
that there's going to be more options
and so that way you know later on my
daughter's daughters and her daughter's
daughter's daughters have more things to
choose from than
just change
me or you know come at risk of a teenage
pregnancy what kind of emails do you get
like what's the most popular email you
get from just the world the most popular
email I get is thank you I knew that
this was going on I had absolutely no
language to describe it you nailed it
that's what I get the most and it's not
like you nailed it Sarah while you wrote
such a great book but instead I knew
that this had to be happening to me you
know I knew that I didn't feel the same
and and this is it like of course of
course it happened I mean I think for a
lot of people we have a blind spot with
the birth control pill I mean it's like
almost everybody goes on it we don't
think about the fact that our hormones
are an important part of what our brain
uses to create the experience of being
who we are right and so we're very
Cavalier and just giving it to people
was like oh well you should go on it for
this and oh you've got some acne you
should go on it too and oh you're
periods sometimes you spot between your
periods you should go on the birth
control pill it's like we don't think
about the fact that when we're making
those changes that's changing who women
are and um yeah so the most frequent
thing that I get is like thank you for
making me myself again thank you for
helping identify what I knew was going
on when I was on it and I didn't have
the words to describe
it yeah and I I I I say this and I touch
on the subject in particular because
I've got so many friends who were in a
relationship where their partner in
their 20s turned around to them and said
I'm not interested in sex anymore or
just their libido fell off a cliff and
they ultimately broke up and they never
really had an answer for it they just
thought you know that person's broken or
that you know women just don't like sex
it's funny cuz when my partner turned
around to me that night in bed and said
to me I remember where I was was in
Jamaica this sounds super weird weird I
was in Bob Marley's old house oh my gosh
I love
it that's what they told me it was
anyway maybe that was just a sales
picture to pay extra for that hotel but
they told me I was in Bob Marley's old
house and
um yeah she turned around to me in bed
and she said I'm not interested in sex
but loads of women aren't don't aren't
interested in sex either I've spoke to
my friends they're not interested either
and that was like the the pitch of it
and I remember thinking as a man
obviously you just feel really
emasculated by it cuz you're like must
be something to do with
right um we ended up breaking up she
went off for a year and went to Barley
did her own thing worked on herself I
think around this time is when she
stopped the birth control pill started
thinking about a lot a lot of other
things and when she came back it was
just a totally different person like we
ended up getting back together just a
totally different person like and I say
this because I don't want people to give
up right when the libido gives up right
yeah no I no no I totally know what you
mean no and I think that that's I think
yes yes yes that she probably has a high
sex drive than Mina I'm just trying to
keep up at this point yeah no I love it
no I love it I think that um especially
with the birth control pill it's like
there's a tendency um to fear that
everything is permanent and like if you
go on it that it ruins you and that it's
going to break you um and the the
research just doesn't quite point in
that direction um unless you're a
teenager if you go on it as a teen we
don't yet know ultimately what that does
to brain development long term but if
you go on it as an adult and then you
discontinue it you can go back to being
the person that you were right and um
yeah and that can include the recovery
of your sexual desire even if you think
that it's lost Dr Sarah hill we have a
closing tradition on this podcast where
the last guest leaves a question for the
next guest not knowing who they're going
to be leaving it for okay and the
question left for you
is hm okay
what is the Legacy that you want to
leave
behind I want to make the world a place
where women understand themselves and
that women are understood as themselves
and not as being some sort of a
malfunctioning
male thank you thank you for all the
work you do it's so interesting for me
so interesting for me as a as a man um
but as men we have mothers we have
sisters we have Partners um so helping
us understand
women in all in every facet of the word
understanding their health their
reproductive Health their sexual health
why they are the way that they are helps
us be better Sons better Brothers better
husbands better boyfriends in a way that
I think is really really important for
both of us as Sexes to like get along
because otherwise you know before I
understood the menstrual cycle and I had
conversations about menopause and I've
had these conversations with you today
it's so so easy to jump to conclusions
about the opposite sex when you're a man
it's so easy to like misinterpret things
and understanding how pertinent hormones
are to how we feel and how we behave and
our mental health and our libido and all
of these things again I think it breeds
empathy it breeds empathy and
understanding and awareness which um I
think will allow us to have the
relationships we hope to have with the
people that are you know our mothers our
sisters and our partners and had I known
some of the things that I know now from
reading your book but also from learning
more broadly about the subject matter of
like women's sexual health and Women's
Health and women's reproductive Health
um a lot of my life would have been
different and that's coming from as man
right A lot of my life would have been
different and someday you know I'm going
to have a daughter I hope someday and I
think it's also informing me about how
to be a better father for my daughter
someday which I think is really really
important and sometimes I do hope that
men click these episodes and I hope they
I could probably look at the numbers but
I hope they they understand the
importance of of of all the subject
matter to them
because yeah I mean we we live in we
inhabit this world together and 50% of
our um the inhabitants of this planet
are women
and and also there's something which I
was quite Illuminating in your work
which is I think I used to be in the of
the opinion that only women had
fluctuations in their hormones and
feelings and I think I've joked before
with my male friends that like we're all
just like this me and my friends right
whereas our partners are like woo right
yeah but I've come to learn that that's
also not true no that's also not true no
men's hormones change dynamically across
the day and they're higher in the
morning than they are later on in the
afternoon and they change in response to
environmental cues so beautiful women
you know the wind or loss of your
favorite sports team the win or loss
your favorite political candidate the
presence of a weapon all of these things
can change men's testosterone levels and
so men's hormones change quite rap like
you know rapidly and in ways that are
more unpr predictable than women's cuz
women's hormones do cycle but they cycle
predictably and if you tell me a woman's
age and the first day of her last
menstrual cycle I can tell you with
almost really high degree of certainty
what's going on with her primary sex
hormones and the same is just not the
truth for men so how the pill changes
everything or this is your brain on
birth control I'll put them both below
I'll link them both below the UK and the
US version I guess the US version is
going to change to the UK title
well no it's now now it's called this is
your brain on birth control how the pill
changes everything
okay it's not on here I know that's
because we CH they they changed the
subtitle when we went to Paperback oh
okay I know it's all very confusing I'll
link it below anyway so everyone can um
have a reading thank you so much for
writing such a a preeminent book on this
subject because it's so so important and
I'm so excited to see the science and
the conversation involved on all of
these subject matters um where do people
find you if they want to ask you
questions or send youil emails or learn
more yeah well they can find me online
at Sarah hill.com and that's Sarah with
an H and I am on Instagram is my most
active platform and it's Sarah eill
PhD um and that's my
handle thank you so much Sarah thank you
pleasure I'm going to let you into a
little bit of a secret and you're
probably going to think that I'm a
little bit weird for saying this but our
team are our team because we absolutely
obsess about the smallest things even
with this podcast when we're recording
this podcast we measure the CO2 levels
in the studio because if it gets above a
th000 parts per million cognitive
performance dips this is the type of 1%
Improvement we make on our show and that
is why the show is the Way It Is by
understanding the power of compounding
1% you can absolutely change your
outcomes in your life it isn't about
drastic Transformations or quick wins
it's about the small consistent actions
that have a last change on your outcomes
so 2 years ago we started the process of
creating this beautiful diary and it's
truly beautiful inside there's lots of
pictures lots of inspiration and
motivation as well some interactive
elements and the purpose of this diary
is to help you identify stay focused on
develop consistency with the 1% that
will ultimately change your life we're
only going to do a limited run of these
Diaries so if you want one for yourself
or for a friend or for a colleague or
for your team then head to the diary.com
right now I'll link it below oh
[Music]